Group Members:

Name: Bader Swarka , ID: 213402241
Name: Mariam Amer, ID: 212737258

Project: PhishGuard

1. What the tool does

PhishGuard is a rule-based and AI-assisted phishing email detection tool.
The user enters email details and text, and the system checks if the email looks safe or suspicious.
The main detection is done using local rules that check for common phishing signs such as suspicious links, urgent words, password requests, payment requests, strange domains, and company impersonation.
The project can also use an LLM as an extra analysis layer. The LLM gives a second opinion, explains the possible risk, and suggests recommended actions. If the online AI service is not available, the project uses a local fallback.

2. Main idea

The main idea is not to rely only on AI.
The project first uses clear rule-based checks to detect suspicious signs and calculate a risk score. After that, the assistant analysis can add another opinion and make the result easier to understand.
This way, the project can still work without an API key, while also supporting an optional LLM-based explanation when the online service is available.

3. Does the tool answer the project goal?

The goal of the project is to help users notice phishing emails before clicking links or giving personal details.
The tool answers this goal because it checks the email, gives a risk score and risk level, and explains the suspicious signs that were found.
It also shows passed checks and gives recommended actions.

4. AI declaration 

I used AI tools as a supporting aid during the development of this project. 
The use of AI was mainly for debugging assistance, improving code organization, clarifying implementation issues, 
and helping me think through possible fixes when problems occurred.



5. Problems we faced

* Some phishing emails are hard to detect using fixed rules.
* One email can contain both normal and suspicious parts.
* Suspicious links can use shorteners, IP addresses, unusual domains, or many subdomains.
* The score needed to show the difference between weak and serious warning signs.
* The OpenAI request can fail when the API key is missing, invalid, or has no available quota.
* The result needed to stay clear even when many checks were performed.

6. Strengths of the tool

* The page is simple to use.
* The tool gives reasons for the result instead of showing only a score.
* The local rule-based detector works without an API key.
* It checks the email text, sender, reply-to address, links, claimed company, and received-hop count.
* It shows suspicious indicators and passed checks.
* It supports strict, balanced, and relaxed detection modes.
* It includes sample emails and a test set evaluation.
* The optional OpenAI analysis adds another analysis layer.
* A local assistant fallback is used if the OpenAI request is unavailable.

7. Weaknesses of the tool

* PhishGuard is not a complete security system.
* Some phishing emails may not be detected.
* The rules cannot understand every possible email context.
* The trusted company and domain lists are limited.
* The user must enter the email details manually.

8. General work description

The user opens the PhishGuard page.
The user enters the sender, reply-to address, claimed organization, subject, received-hop count, and email content.
The user can also load one of the sample emails and choose a detection mode.

The user clicks the Analyze button.
The detector checks the email text, addresses, links, and other details.
The system calculates a risk score from 0 to 100 and gives a low, medium, or high risk level.

When assistant analysis is enabled, the project tries the backend OpenAI service first.
If it is not available, the local assistant fallback is used.

The result is shown with suspicious indicators, passed checks, an explanation, recommended actions, and a text report.

9. Main code components

index.html:
This file contains the main page structure.
It includes the fields for sender email, reply-to, claimed organization, subject, detection mode, received hops, and email content.
It also contains the Analyze and Clear buttons, sample selector, loading area, result sections, report box, and evaluation section.
The page loads styles/styles.css and the JavaScript files from src.

styles/styles.css:
This file controls the page design.
It handles the layout, colors, buttons, cards, input fields, loading display, result section, and responsive layout.
It works with the classes and elements in index.html and does not change the detection logic.

src/app.js:
This file connects the page with the detection logic.
The readForm() function collects the values from the input fields, and the submit event passes them to analyzeEmailAssisted().
The renderResult() function shows the score, risk level, findings, passed checks, assistant details, and report.
It also handles empty-input validation, loading messages, clearing the form, loading samples, and running the sample evaluation.

src/detector.js:
This file contains the main phishing detection logic.
The analyzeEmail() function checks text patterns, sender and reply-to domains, received hops, links, suspicious domains, and brand impersonation.
It adds weighted points, creates the risk score, classifies the risk level, and builds the explanation and report.
The analyzeEmailAssisted() function starts with the local result and can combine it with the assistant verdict.
The file also contains URL helper functions, the structured summary for the backend, and evaluateSamples() for the built-in test set.

src/samples.js:
This file stores the sampleEmails list.
The samples include phishing, legitimate, and gray-area emails with expected labels.
src/app.js uses them in the sample selector, and evaluateSamples() uses them to calculate the evaluation results.

src/llm.js:
This file contains the assistant functions used by src/detector.js.
realLlmSummarizeEmail() sends the structured summary to the backend endpoint.
mockLlmSummarizeEmail() provides the local fallback and checks common text and URL signals when the online request is not available.
It also builds a short assistant verdict, reasons, likely goal, and recommended actions.

server.js:
This file contains the Express backend.
It serves the project files and receives structured assistant requests at /api/analyze-llm.
When an API key is available, analyzeWithOpenAI() sends the structured summary to the OpenAI Responses API and checks the returned JSON format.
The local detector remains the main detector, and the online LLM is only an extra layer.

package.json:
This file contains the project information, Node.js requirement, dependencies, and run script.
It lists Express and dotenv and connects npm start to server.js.

package-lock.json:
This file stores the exact installed dependency versions.
It is used with package.json so npm installs the same dependency versions for the project.

.env.example:
This file shows the environment variable names used by the backend.
It contains a placeholder for OPENAI_API_KEY and optional settings for the model and port.
It can be copied to a local .env file, but it does not contain a real API key.

Implementation Flow:

1. The user fills the email fields.
2. The user clicks Analyze.
3. src/app.js reads the input values.
4. The data is passed to the detector.
5. src/detector.js checks the email using local rules.
6. A risk score and risk level are created.
7. src/app.js shows the result on the page.
8. If the LLM backend is available, an extra assistant analysis may also be shown. If it is unavailable, the local fallback can be used.

10. How detection works

The project checks the email for suspicious patterns.

The checks include:

* urgent words and pressure messages
* fake login or account suspension messages
* password, username, card, and one-time-code requests
* payment and invoice requests
* suspicious or shortened links
* raw IP address links
* unencrypted HTTP links
* punycode and long subdomain links
* suspicious top-level domains
* different sender and reply-to domains
* a claimed company that does not match its trusted domains
* QR phishing text
* unusual received-hop counts

Each suspicious sign has a weight and adds points to the risk score.
Serious signs add more points.
More suspicious signs normally give a higher risk level.

The selected detection mode changes the score multiplier and detection thresholds.
The system also records passed checks, such as matching sender and reply-to domains or no clickable links.

The assistant can add a second verdict.
When an assistant result is available, the final score uses 70 percent of the rule-based score and 30 percent of the assistant verdict.

11. How to run the project

Requirements:

* Node.js 18 or newer

From the project folder, run:

npm install
npm start

Then open:

http://localhost:3000

OpenAI setup is optional.
To use the real AI service, create a .env file based on .env.example and set:

OPENAI_API_KEY=your_key_here

The model and port can also be changed with OPENAI_MODEL and PORT.
Without an API key, the local fallback is used.

12. Testing and evaluation

To test the project:

1. Run the project.
2. Enter a normal email.
3. Check that the result is low risk.
4. Enter a suspicious email with an urgent message or fake link.
5. Check that the risk score becomes higher.
6. Test an email asking for a password or payment details.
7. Test empty input and check that the validation message appears.
8. Test with and without the OpenAI API key.
9. Load the built-in samples and click Run Evaluation.
The evaluation section tests the rule-based detector with the sample emails in src/samples.js.
It shows accuracy, precision, recall, true positives, true negatives, false positives, and false negatives.

